JOSS paper (#89)
grp-bork/formHTR: paper/paper.md

Reviewer: Maybe a bit more interesting and technical?
Ideas like: 
- formHTR: Template-Guided Handwritten Text Extraction from Scanned Form Documents
- formHTR: Improving Handwritten Form OCR through Template Annotation and Multi-Model Evaluation
- formHTR: Combining Template Knowledge and Multi-Model OCR for Handwritten Form Extraction

Author: We went with `formHTR: Template-Guided OCR Extraction of Handwritten Content from Scanned Forms` in [83561c3](https://github.com/grp-bork/formHTR/pull/89/commits/83561c381bd51b27aae1a823c3acf735614c49d7).

Reviewer: maybe 'to record the ORIGIN and context'...

Reviewer: It is necessary **TO** build.....

---
title: 'formHTR: A Python package for handwritten text recognition in form documents'
tags:
  - Python
  - OCR
authors:
  - name: Matej Troják
    orcid: 0000-0003-0841-2707
    corresponding: true
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Jan Glos
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Stéphane Pesant
    orcid: 0000-0002-4936-5209
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Peer Bork
    orcid: 0000-0002-2627-833X
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
 - name: EMBL, Heidelberg, Germany
   index: 1
   ror: "03mstc592"
 - name: EMBL-EBI, Hinxton, UK
   index: 2
   ror: "02catss52"
 - name: Masaryk university, Czech republic
   index: 3
   ror: "02j46qs45"
date: 14 April 2026
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

> The formHTR is a Python software package for automatic extraction of handwritten contents from scanned form documents. While extraction step itself is secured using advanced pretrained OCR models, a key step in the process is considering the prior knowledge of the expected contents. That is achieved by the precise, semi-automatic annotation of the regions of interest (ROIs) in the form template, specifying the locations and content types of ROIs. Using this approach in combination with comparing and evaluating outputs from multiple OCR models significantly improves the quality of the extraction.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`formHTR` is a Python software package for automatic extraction of handwritten contents from scanned form documents. While the (word|content|character?) extraction  itself is secured using advanced pretrained OCR models, a key step in the process is considering the prior knowledge of the expected contents. That is achieved by the precise, semi-automatic annotation of the regions of interest (ROIs) in the form template, specifying the locations and content types of ROIs. Using this approach in combination with comparing and evaluating outputs from multiple OCR models significantly improves the quality of the extraction.
```

# Statement of need

> Large-scale scientific expeditions often collect huge amounts of samples, with a need to write down the context of the samples and observed features (metadata). While digital metadata collection methods are getting more popular, paper forms (so called *logsheets*) are still the most popular method for their reliability in extreme environments, stability, natural scalability, and ease to use [@VANTAMELEN2004123; @BREWER2016131].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Large-scale scientific expeditions often collect huge amounts of samples, with a need to recording the context of the samples and observed features (metadata). While digital metadata collection methods are becoming more popular, paper forms (so called "logsheets") are still the most popular method for their reliability in extreme environments, stability, natural scalability, and ease to use [@VANTAMELEN2004123; @BREWER2016131].
```

> It is necessary build an infrastructure for processing of the logsheets automatically with minimum of manual interventions and laborious proofreading. Optical character recognition (OCR) methods [@ocr156468] are used to extract the content from a scanned logsheet, with additional complexity added by handwritten type of content. While training custom models on a particular handwriting style of a person is generally more precise, in a large-scale expeditions, the turnaround of staff and consequently the amount of distinct handwritings is usually infeasible. The use of multiple pretrained general purpose OCR models, allowing consensus or majority decision making, is a more suitable approach.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is necessary build an infrastructure for processing of the logsheets automatically with a minimal amount of manual interventions and laborious proofreading. Optical character recognition (OCR) methods [@ocr156468] are used to extract the content from a scanned logsheet, with additional complexity added by handwritten type of content. While training custom models on a particular handwriting style of a person is generally more precise, this approach is infeasible for large-scale expeditions with high turnaround of staff and consequently higher amount of distinct handwritings. The use of multiple pretrained general purpose OCR models, allowing consensus or majority decision making, is a more suitable approach.
```

> Additionally, assuming a large-scale expedition enforces certain standards on the sample collection process, so does on the metadata level. That means standardised logsheets are often developed, and used repeatedly in various sampling scenarios. As a consequence, to digitalise the contents of such logsheets, we can leverage their known structure and expected content types, and navigate the OCR methods for more reliable and precise results.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, assuming a large-scale expedition enforces certain standards on the sample collection process, so does it on the metadata level. That means standardised logsheets are often developed, and used repeatedly in various sampling scenarios. As a consequence, to digitalise the contents of such logsheets, we can leverage their known structure and expected content types to control the OCR methods for more reliable and precise results.
```

# State of the field

> The current OCR landscape of pretrained tools can be split between open-source models and cloud-based services. On the open-source side, there are many tools such as Tesseract OCR [@tesseract_ocr], EasyOCR [@easyocr], OCR4All [@app9224853], and PaddleOCR [@cui2025paddleocr30technicalreport] provide pretrained models or optionally allow to train custom models. Some of the trade-offs are in accuracy, speed, and deployment complexity. The cloud-based pretrained OCR services, including Google Cloud Vision API [@google_vision_api], Azure AI Document Intelligence [@azure_form_recognizer], and Amazon Textract [@amazon_textract], are accessible via APIs and provide are highly optimized for structured documents and provide higher-level outputs (e.g. key–value pairs).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The current OCR landscape of pretrained tools can be split between open-source models and cloud-based services. On the open-source side, there are many tools such as Tesseract OCR [@tesseract_ocr], EasyOCR [@easyocr], OCR4All [@app9224853], and PaddleOCR [@cui2025paddleocr30technicalreport] provide pretrained models or optionally allow to train custom models. Some of the trade-offs are in accuracy, speed, and deployment complexity. Cloud-based pretrained OCR services, including Google Cloud Vision API [@google_vision_api], Azure AI Document Intelligence [@azure_form_recognizer], and Amazon Textract [@amazon_textract], are accessible via APIs and are highly optimised for structured documents and provide higher-level outputs (e.g. key–value pairs).
```

Here, we had an American -ize, earlier British -ise.

> A natural extension are tools that combine multiple tools, models, or services. Systems such as OCRmyPDF [@ocrmypdf] or unified interfaces like OcrPy [@ocrpy] integrate engines like Tesseract, cloud APIs, and downstream processing into a single pipeline, effectively abstracting over multiple OCR backends. Tool Handprint [@handprint] combines multiple cloud services and outputs annotated images or raw results, as well as compares the recognized text to some level of the ground truth (expected content)[^1].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A natural extension are tools that combine multiple tools, models, or services. Systems such as OCRmyPDF [@ocrmypdf] or unified interfaces like OcrPy [@ocrpy] integrate engines like Tesseract, cloud APIs, and downstream processing into a single pipeline, effectively abstracting over multiple OCR backends. The tool `Handprint` [@handprint] combines multiple cloud services and outputs annotated images or raw results, as well as compares the recognized text to some level of the ground truth (expected content)[^1].
```

[^1]: The package is not maintained anymore.

# Software design

> The tool is structured into two main parts. The first part, further divided into two substeps, is dedicated to annotating form templates in order to specify the regions of interest (ROIs) and assign them a meaning (name, type, and the position). The first substep is used solely for selecting and manipulating the region locations, while in the second substep the variable names and types are assigned to individual ROIs. The output of the whole step is a config file containing position, name, and type of identified ROIs. In \autoref{fig:overview} there is an overview of the all the steps.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`formHTR` is structured into two main parts. The first part, further divided into two substeps, is dedicated to annotating form templates in order to specify the regions of interest (ROIs) and assign them a meaning (name, type, and the position). The first substep is used solely for selecting and manipulating the region locations, while in the second substep the variable names and types are assigned to individual ROIs. The output of the whole step is a config file containing position, name, and type of identified ROIs.  \autoref{fig:overview} provides an overview of the all the steps.
```

maybe give the parts, potentially the steps actual names? "the first substep... in the second substep...  -> The output of the whole step (which is actually "the first part")) -> confusing

![Schematic overview of formHTR annotation and processing workflow. \label{fig:overview}](scheme.png)

> The second step identifies and extracts content from the ROIs. The first substep is to align the scanned logsheet with its template. The motivation of this step is to ensure the ROIs actually match the regions in the scanned logsheet, otherwise they would point to potentially empty or generally mismatched regions. While the goal is straightforward, the execution can be problematic, especially when the template has no fiducial markers or the scan quality is low. For this reason, a manual alignment is possible as well.

Reviewer 2: now we have substeps again, and another "first substep" nonetheless -> names? alternatively, "the first stubstep is to align -> First, the scanned logsheet is aligned with its template."

> The second substep is to convert the aligned logsheet to an image and query several OCR models to identify and extract the content. For this purpose, three services are used by calling their respective APIs - Google Cloud Vision [@google_vision_api], Azure AI Document Intelligence [@azure_form_recognizer], and Amazon Textract [@amazon_textract]. All three services output a set of detected words with their location (bounding box) in the image.[^2]

Reviewer 2: "Secondly, the aligned logsheet is converted to an image and is queried .. " (but then again, this is passive voice, so maybe naming the steps)

> [^2]: All services offer a free tier with limited amount of requests per month. The user needs provide suitable account credentials. A quick start description how to do it is available at the [wiki pages](https://github.com/grp-bork/formHTR/wiki/Setup-services) of the repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[^2]: All services offer a free tier with limited amount of requests per month. The user needs to provide suitable account credentials. A quick start description how to do this is available at the [wiki pages](https://github.com/grp-bork/formHTR/wiki/Setup-services) of the `formHTR` repository.
```

> Next step is a binning of identified contents into the ROIs for each service. An appropriate ROI needs to be decided for each captured fragment of text (a word). There are several cases that need to be considered, such as a word spanning over multiple ROIs or multiple words overlapping with a single ROI (for examples, see \autoref{fig:binning}). To find all overlaps for a ROI from all the services, the number of possibilities and cases that need to be investigated can grow. We use ```R-tree``` [@rtree] to index the regions and capture their overlaps for all services' outputs and the template specification. The ```R-tree``` consequently allows an effective querying for intersections. Additionally, the logsheet can contain preprinted contents (*residuals*) that do not belong to ROIs, but can be shifted to its boundary box by an imperfect alignment. This is handled by defining the residuals already in the annotation step, allowing their elimination from the outputs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The next step is the binning of identified contents into the ROIs for each service. An appropriate ROI needs to be decided for each captured fragment of text (a word). Several cases that need to be considered, such as a word spanning over multiple ROIs or multiple words overlapping with a single ROI (for examples, see \autoref{fig:binning}). To find all overlaps for a ROI from all the services, the number of possibilities and cases that need to be investigated can grow. We use ```R-tree``` [@rtree] to index the regions and capture their overlaps for all services' outputs and the template specification. The ```R-tree``` consequently allows to effectively querying for intersections. Additionally, the logsheet can contain preprinted contents (*residuals*) that do not belong to ROIs, but can be shifted to its boundary box by an imperfect alignment. This is handled by defining the residuals already in the annotation step, thus allowing to exclude them from the outputs.
```

number of possibilities can grow -> how? explode? exponentially? ...

![Examples of various situations of the text position identification w.r.t a ROI. (PLACEHOLDER) \label{fig:binning}](binning.png)

> Assuming the words are binned for all services, we can use a voting algorithm to pick the most likely output. With three services, a majority vote can be applied. In cases when there is no consensus, a random choice is made. Similarly, the tool works even with less than three services enabled, but naturally the quality of the output is lowered by inability to perform the voting. On top of the voting, the weight of votes can be altered by using the known information about the ROIs. In the current version, priority to numerical values (if expected) is given. This aspect has a very high potential for extensions in the future versions (e.g. allow only values from a dictionary, limit the length of the content, satisfy a regex, number in an integer range).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Assuming the words are binned for all services, we can use a voting algorithm to pick the most likely output. With three services, a majority vote can be applied. In cases when there is no consensus, a random choice is made. Similarly, the tool works even with less than three services enabled, albeit with lower output quality due to the inability to perform the voting. On top of the voting, the weight of votes can be altered by using known information about the ROIs. In the current version, priority is given to numerical values (if expected). This aspect has a very high potential for extensions in future versions (e.g. allow only values from a dictionary, only content satisfying a regex, only numbers from an integer range, or content satisfying a length threshold).
```

> Finally, the output of the tool is an Excel spreadsheet (an ```.xlsx``` file) with two sheets. The first sheet has three columns - variable name coming from the specification, extracted content as the result coming from the voting algorithm, and inserted picture cut out of the scanned (and aligned) logsheet based on the bounding box defined in the specification. This can be used for a quick proofreading of the outputs. The second sheet contains any miscellaneous content that did not fall into any ROI nor was filtered out as a residual. This can typically alert the user to any comments and notes written on unexpected parts of the logsheet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The output of `formHTR` is an Excel spreadsheet (an ```.xlsx``` file) with two sheets. The first sheet has three columns: a variable name from the specification, the extracted content as the result of the voting algorithm, and a picture cut out of the scanned (and aligned) logsheet based on the bounding box defined in the specification. This can be used for a quick proofreading of the outputs. The second sheet contains any miscellaneous content that neither falls into any ROI nor was filtered out as a residual. This can typically alert the user to any comments and notes written on unexpected parts of the logsheet.
```

are the two sheets named? should they? can they?

# Research impact statement

> The tool was used on a set of scanned logsheets containing provenance metadata coming from the Traversing European Coastlines (TREC) expedition[^3]. Roughly ten thousand double-sided logsheets of roughly hundred different types (templates) were collected, together providing contextual metadata to more than eighty thousand collected samples. Using this package, the logsheet templates were annotated and all the scanned logsheets processed. The metadata was extracted and curated, and archived[^4] in the BioSamples database [@courtot2022biosamples]. The contextual metadata is an essential base for the samples analysis and data production, which is in initial phase during writing of this manuscript.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`formHTR` was used on a set of scanned logsheets containing provenance metadata coming from the TRaversing European Coastlines (TREC) expedition[^3]. Roughly ten thousand double-sided logsheets of roughly hundred different types (templates) were collected, together providing contextual metadata to more than eighty thousand collected samples. Using this package, the logsheet templates were annotated and all the scanned logsheets processed. The metadata was extracted and curated, and archived[^4] in the BioSamples database [@courtot2022biosamples]. The contextual metadata is an essential foundation for sample analysis and data production, which, at the time of writing is in the initial phase.
```

"Using this package" -> Using formHTR, right?

[^3]: https://www.embl.org/about/info/trec/

[^4]: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/biosamples/samples?text=Traversing+European+Coastlines+%28TREC%29+expedition

# Example workflow

> An example workflow comprises of the three steps, assuming we have a template and scanned logsheet. We first need to create and annotate ROIs for the template, and consequently process the logsheet, creating the output Excel spreadsheet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An example workflow comprises three steps, assuming we have a template and scanned logsheet. We first need to create and annotate ROIs for the template, and consequently process the logsheet, ultimately creating the output Excel spreadsheet.
```
which are the three steps?

create, annotate, process ?

Reviewer 2: nvm the question - got it

```
# 1) Create ROI config for a template
formhtr select-rois --pdf-file template.pdf --output-file config.json

# 2) Annotate ROI types and variable names
formhtr annotate-rois --pdf-file template.pdf --config-file config.json --output-file config_annotated.json

# 3) Process a scanned logsheet
formhtr process-logsheet \
  --pdf-logsheet scan.pdf \
  --pdf-template template.pdf \
  --config-file config_annotated.json \
  --output-file output.xlsx \
  --google google_credentials.json \
  --amazon amazon_credentials.json \
  --azure azure_credentials.json
```

# Author's Contributions

MT wrote the manuscript and developed the software. JG contributed to the software. SP contributed via conceptual guidance and contributed to the manuscript. PB provided conceptual oversight and funding.

# AI usage disclosure

No generative AI tools were used in the development of this software, or the writing of this manuscript. AI tools were used in the preparation of supporting materials, namely setting up and generating the documentation and tests.

# Acknowledgements

> This publication was enabled by the support of EMBL member states to the TREC expedition, within the framework of EMBL’s Molecules to Ecosystems Programme (2022-2026).

Reviewer 2: Are you planning to write a "RIP PB" statement?

Author: This needs to be potentially changed according to TREC publication guidelines.
